README.md, before:

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->
**Table of Contents**  *generated with [DocToc](https://github.com/thlorenz/doctoc)*

- [1. Installation and start up](#1-installation-and-start-up)
  - [1.0. Development server](#10-development-server)
  - [1.1. Code scaffolding](#11-code-scaffolding)
  - [1.2. Build](#12-build)
  - [1.3. Running unit tests](#13-running-unit-tests)
  - [1.4. Running end-to-end tests](#14-running-end-to-end-tests)
  - [1.5. Further help](#15-further-help)
- [2. Reactive programming](#2-reactive-programming)
  - [2.1. Reactive Properties of Browser Events](#21-reactive-properties-of-browser-events)
  - [2.2. Relation Between Custom Application Events and Observer Pattern](#22-relation-between-custom-application-events-and-observer-pattern)
  - [2.3. Building an Application Based on a Custom Event Bus](#23-building-an-application-based-on-a-custom-event-bus)
  - [2.4. Global Event Bus (is NOT Scallable in Complexity)](#24-global-event-bus-is-not-scallable-in-complexity)
    - [2.4.1. Implementing a Global Event Bus](#241-implementing-a-global-event-bus)
    - [2.4.2. Broadcast Application Data using the Global Event Bus](#242-broadcast-application-data-using-the-global-event-bus)
    - [2.4.3. Add Support for Different Types of Application Events](#243-add-support-for-different-types-of-application-events)
  - [2.5. An Application Implemented in non-reactive style](#25-an-application-implemented-in-non-reactive-style)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

Understanding the OBSERVABLE PATTERN is the key for understanding RxJs Library and using the operators to programm in a reactive style.

We install YARN = a better package manager, using npm.

YARN is reliable, fast, secure - guarantees that I can have the exact same dependencies trees as someone has. Also is able to freeze my hall dependencies tree in a deterministic way. Build will complete succesfully due to yarn instalation.

# 1. Installation and start up

- ``npm i -g @angular/cli`` to install Angular Command Line Interface

- by default,the setting for each generated component, in angular.json is: ``"prefix": "app",``

- Run : ``ng new --skip-install rxjs-reactive-patterns`` to generate a simple, clean project structure, without dependencies

- ``npm i yarn -g`` to install yarn globaly

-  ``yarn` after this to quickly install dependencies for this app via YARN

## 1.0. Development server

Run `ng serve` for a dev server. Navigate to `http://localhost:4200/`. The app will automatically reload if you change any of the source files.

## 1.1. Code scaffolding

Run `ng generate component component-name` to generate a new component. You can also use `ng generate directive|pipe|service|class|guard|interface|enum|module`.

## 1.2. Build

Run `ng build` to build the project. The build artifacts will be stored in the `dist/` directory. Use the `--prod` flag for a production build.

## 1.3. Running unit tests

Run `ng test` to execute the unit tests via [Karma](https://karma-runner.github.io).

## 1.4. Running end-to-end tests

Run `ng e2e` to execute the end-to-end tests via [Protractor](http://www.protractortest.org/).

## 1.5. Further help

To get more help on the Angular CLI use `ng help` or go check out the [Angular CLI README](https://github.com/angular/angular-cli/blob/master/README.md).

# 2. Reactive programming

## 2.1. Reactive Properties of Browser Events

Observe the similarities between BROWSER EVENTS and reactive programming:


- we can register a listener (subscrieber) to the browser events (streaming of data about events)

- the listener is a function that is called multiple times - invoked by a third party mechanism

- we cannot trigger events on behalf of the browser

```TypeScript
this.hoverSelection = document.getElementById('hover');
  this.hoverSelection.addEventListener('mousemove', ev => {
    console.log(ev);
  });
```
- for example, above, we are not aware of how the internal browser mechanism for handling mouse moves work.

- we have no access to that mechanism and we cannot, for example trigger mouse events on behalf of the

browser which is actually a good thing. This means that if we want to build programs using the BROWSER EVENTS API,

- we need to build them in a way that we simply declare via certain functions and listener functions, how should we REACT to the arrival of the new event.

- by moving the callback to a separate function we can unsubribe from the sequence of events (the stream of mouse movement events)

```TypeScript
hoverSelection: HTMLElement;

// ..
  ngOnInit() {

  this.hoverSelection = document.getElementById('hover');
  this.hoverSelection.addEventListener('mousemove', onMouseMove);
  }

  unsubscribeFromEventListener() {
    console.log('Called unsubscribeFromEventListener()');
    this.hoverSelection.removeEventListener('mousemove', onMouseMove);
  }

}

function onMouseMove(ev: MouseEvent) {
    console.log(ev);
}
```
- the ability to subscribe and unsubscribe to streams of data is another similarity

BROWSER DOM EVENTS MECHANISM is a general way to handle asynchronous data and we use this general and powerfull concept also in reactive programming.

## 2.2. Relation Between Custom Application Events and Observer Pattern

A PATTERN =  A RECEPIE for how to build software:

![Observer Pattern Diagram](observerPattern.jpg)

Diagram above describes the receipe for implementing application events.

Is about LOOSE COUPLING between different parts of the application.

The Observer is an interface with ``notify`` method that provides new data.

**Is closely related to Browser Events mechanism.**

In the system there are multiple Observers that are observing on the SAME SUBJECT.

An observer whants to receive a notification if a SUBJECT has a a change in internal state,

so is going to register itself on the SUBJECT.

The subject will contain internally a COLLECTION OF REGISTERED OBSERVERS.

Whenever the SUBJECT has a change of internal state is going to notify the each OBSERVER from obeserverCollection, via ``notifyObservers``


Analogies:  Subject         <---------> hoverSelection
            
            registerEvent   <--------> addEventListener

            unregisterEvent <---------> removeEventListener

            collection of observers <---------> registered callbacks for onMouseMove, onClick methods

            notify          <----------> call the callbacks of onMouseMove  directly
             
            PUBLIC notifyObservers <---------> ! NO ANALOGIE - THIS IS A MAJOR DIFFERENCE -

            We are NOT ABLE TO TRIGGER EVENTS ON BEHALF OF THE BROWSER (the mouse movement, for example
            
            is an internal implementation of the Browser, private!

with the Observer Pattern, unlike the case of Browser Events any of the Observers can

trigger the emission of new values for all the other registered Observers.

This is unlike the case of browser callbacks -  we can only register callbacks and get back data.

```TypeScript
// similar to registering the onMouseMove and onClick in Subject's collection of Observers:
  this.hoverSelection.addEventListener('mousemove', onMouseMove);
  this.hoverSelection.addEventListener('click', onClick);
```

## 2.3. Building an Application Based on a Custom Event Bus

``git checkout -b custom-events`` and start implementing inside this new branch

``ng g c event-bus-experiments``

``ng g c lessons-list``

``ng g c lessons-counter``

Event Bus is an Observer interface with a notify method that gets some payload data (as parameter).

The EventBus class is not visible in other components, as we export only an instance of it:

``export const globalEventBus = new EventBus();``

## 2.4. Global Event Bus (is NOT Scallable in Complexity)

 Global Event Bus = is a component communication mechanism (that allows components to interact with each other), without @Input and @Output parameters, but is NOT Scallable in Complexity -

 that's why we USE Reactive Programming INSTEAD.

### 2.4.1. Implementing a Global Event Bus

Install Lodash Library and its type definitons to have the autocomplete available:

``yarn add lodash @types/lodash``

use it: ``import * as _ from 'loadash'``

``_.remove`` method mutates the array that we pass to it by appling the second parameter = a function, to it.

### 2.4.2. Broadcast Application Data using the Global Event Bus

Whenever component is initialized we are going to use the constantant ``globalEventBus``, instance of ``EventBus`` to notify all the subscribed Observers - in this case, we broadcast a list of lessons, to any observers that will need this data.

``globalEventBus.notifyObservers(testLessons);``

EventBusExperiments component, only knows about the ``globalEventBus``.

``LessonsListComponent implements Observer`` otherwise, if it implements the OnInit, the notify wont be called.

### 2.4.3. Add Support for Different Types of Application Events

 - add the `eventType` parameter to the EventBus methods;

 - examples of globalEventTypes: LESSONS_LIST_AVAILABLE, ADD_NEW_LESSON

 - change the collection of registered observers to be a map:

  ``{[key: string]: Observer[]} = {}``
  
  - add a private method to have a list of observersPerEventType

  - filter the collection of registered observers by event type

  - use a copy of testLessons array, instead of the entier testLessons:
  
  ``globalEventBus.notifyObservers(LESSONS_LIST_AVAILABLE, testLessons.slice(0));``
   
## 2.5. An Application Implemented in non-reactive style

``git checkout -b custom-events-non-scalable``

  - more than one component modifies the same data;

  - tight coupling between LessonsComponent and the main component

  - in the LessonsComponent we have a different array than the one from 
  
  EventBusExperimentsComponent, and that's why the opperations implemented at
  
  the level of LessonsComponent won't propagate to the level of 
  
  EventBusExperimentsComponent

Commit message:

Custom Events Bus - Non Scalable App

README.md, after:

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->
**Table of Contents**  *generated with [DocToc](https://github.com/thlorenz/doctoc)*

- [1. Installation and start up](#1-installation-and-start-up)
  - [1.0. Development server](#10-development-server)
  - [1.1. Code scaffolding](#11-code-scaffolding)
  - [1.2. Build](#12-build)
  - [1.3. Running unit tests](#13-running-unit-tests)
  - [1.4. Running end-to-end tests](#14-running-end-to-end-tests)
  - [1.5. Further help](#15-further-help)
- [2. Reactive programming](#2-reactive-programming)
  - [2.1. Reactive Properties of Browser Events](#21-reactive-properties-of-browser-events)
  - [2.2. Relation Between Custom Application Events and Observer Pattern](#22-relation-between-custom-application-events-and-observer-pattern)
  - [2.3. Building an Application Based on a Custom Event Bus](#23-building-an-application-based-on-a-custom-event-bus)
  - [2.4. Global Event Bus (is NOT Scallable in Complexity)](#24-global-event-bus-is-not-scallable-in-complexity)
    - [2.4.1. Implementing a Global Event Bus](#241-implementing-a-global-event-bus)
    - [2.4.2. Broadcast Application Data using the Global Event Bus](#242-broadcast-application-data-using-the-global-event-bus)
    - [2.4.3. Add Support for Different Types of Application Events](#243-add-support-for-different-types-of-application-events)
  - [2.5. An Application Implemented in non-reactive style](#25-an-application-implemented-in-non-reactive-style)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

Understanding the OBSERVABLE PATTERN is the key for understanding RxJs Library and using the operators to programm in a reactive style.

We install YARN = a better package manager, using npm.

YARN is reliable, fast, secure - guarantees that I can have the exact same dependencies trees as someone has. Also is able to freeze my hall dependencies tree in a deterministic way. Build will complete succesfully due to yarn instalation.

# 1. Installation and start up

- ``npm i -g @angular/cli`` to install Angular Command Line Interface

- by default,the setting for each generated component, in angular.json is: ``"prefix": "app",``

- Run : ``ng new --skip-install rxjs-reactive-patterns`` to generate a simple, clean project structure, without dependencies

- ``npm i yarn -g`` to install yarn globaly

-  ``yarn` after this to quickly install dependencies for this app via YARN

## 1.0. Development server

Run `ng serve` for a dev server. Navigate to `http://localhost:4200/`. The app will automatically reload if you change any of the source files.

## 1.1. Code scaffolding

Run `ng generate component component-name` to generate a new component. You can also use `ng generate directive|pipe|service|class|guard|interface|enum|module`.

## 1.2. Build

Run `ng build` to build the project. The build artifacts will be stored in the `dist/` directory. Use the `--prod` flag for a production build.

## 1.3. Running unit tests

Run `ng test` to execute the unit tests via [Karma](https://karma-runner.github.io).

## 1.4. Running end-to-end tests

Run `ng e2e` to execute the end-to-end tests via [Protractor](http://www.protractortest.org/).

## 1.5. Further help

To get more help on the Angular CLI use `ng help` or go check out the [Angular CLI README](https://github.com/angular/angular-cli/blob/master/README.md).

# 2. Reactive programming

## 2.1. Reactive Properties of Browser Events

Observe the similarities between BROWSER EVENTS and reactive programming:


- we can register a listener (subscrieber) to the browser events (streaming of data about events)

- the listener is a function that is called multiple times - invoked by a third party mechanism

- we cannot trigger events on behalf of the browser

```TypeScript
this.hoverSelection = document.getElementById('hover');
  this.hoverSelection.addEventListener('mousemove', ev => {
    console.log(ev);
  });
```
- for example, above, we are not aware of how the internal browser mechanism for handling mouse moves work.

- we have no access to that mechanism and we cannot, for example trigger mouse events on behalf of the

browser which is actually a good thing. This means that if we want to build programs using the BROWSER EVENTS API,

- we need to build them in a way that we simply declare via certain functions and listener functions, how should we REACT to the arrival of the new event.

- by moving the callback to a separate function we can unsubribe from the sequence of events (the stream of mouse movement events)

```TypeScript
hoverSelection: HTMLElement;

// ..
  ngOnInit() {

  this.hoverSelection = document.getElementById('hover');
  this.hoverSelection.addEventListener('mousemove', onMouseMove);
  }

  unsubscribeFromEventListener() {
    console.log('Called unsubscribeFromEventListener()');
    this.hoverSelection.removeEventListener('mousemove', onMouseMove);
  }

}

function onMouseMove(ev: MouseEvent) {
    console.log(ev);
}
```
- the ability to subscribe and unsubscribe to streams of data is another similarity

BROWSER DOM EVENTS MECHANISM is a general way to handle asynchronous data and we use this general and powerfull concept also in reactive programming.

## 2.2. Relation Between Custom Application Events and Observer Pattern

A PATTERN =  A RECEPIE for how to build software:

![Observer Pattern Diagram](observerPattern.jpg)

Diagram above describes the receipe for implementing application events.

Is about LOOSE COUPLING between different parts of the application.

The Observer is an interface with ``notify`` method that provides new data.

**Is closely related to Browser Events mechanism.**

In the system there are multiple Observers that are observing on the SAME SUBJECT.

An observer wants to receive a notification if a SUBJECT has a a change in internal state,

so is going to register itself on the SUBJECT.

The subject will contain internally a COLLECTION OF REGISTERED OBSERVERS.

Whenever the SUBJECT has a change of internal state is going to notify the each OBSERVER from obeserverCollection, via ``notifyObservers``


Analogies:  Subject         <---------> hoverSelection
            
            registerEvent   <--------> addEventListener

            unregisterEvent <---------> removeEventListener

            collection of observers <---------> registered callbacks for onMouseMove, onClick methods

            notify          <----------> call the callbacks of onMouseMove  directly
             
            PUBLIC notifyObservers <---------> ! NO ANALOGIE - THIS IS A MAJOR DIFFERENCE -

            We are NOT ABLE TO TRIGGER EVENTS ON BEHALF OF THE BROWSER (the mouse movement, for example
            
            is an internal implementation of the Browser, private!

with the Observer Pattern, unlike the case of Browser Events any of the Observers can

trigger the emission of new values for all the other registered Observers.

This is unlike the case of browser callbacks -  we can only register callbacks and get back data.

```TypeScript
// similar to registering the onMouseMove and onClick in Subject's collection of Observers:
  this.hoverSelection.addEventListener('mousemove', onMouseMove);
  this.hoverSelection.addEventListener('click', onClick);
```

## 2.3. Building an Application Based on a Custom Event Bus

``git checkout -b custom-events`` and start implementing inside this new branch

``ng g c event-bus-experiments``

``ng g c lessons-list``

``ng g c lessons-counter``

Event Bus is an Observer interface with a notify method that gets some payload data (as parameter).

The EventBus class is not visible in other components, as we export only an instance of it:

``export const globalEventBus = new EventBus();``

## 2.4. Global Event Bus (is NOT Scallable in Complexity)

 Global Event Bus = is a component communication mechanism (that allows components to interact with each other), without @Input and @Output parameters, but is NOT Scallable in Complexity -

 that's why we USE Reactive Programming INSTEAD.

### 2.4.1. Implementing a Global Event Bus

Install Lodash Library and its type definitons to have the autocomplete available:

``yarn add lodash @types/lodash``

use it: ``import * as _ from 'loadash'``

``_.remove`` method mutates the array that we pass to it by appling the second parameter = a function, to it.

### 2.4.2. Broadcast Application Data using the Global Event Bus

Whenever component is initialized we are going to use the constantant ``globalEventBus``, instance of ``EventBus`` to notify all the subscribed Observers - in this case, we broadcast a list of lessons, to any observers that will need this data.

``globalEventBus.notifyObservers(testLessons);``

EventBusExperiments component, only knows about the ``globalEventBus``.

``LessonsListComponent implements Observer`` otherwise, if it implements the OnInit, the notify wont be called.

### 2.4.3. Add Support for Different Types of Application Events

 - add the `eventType` parameter to the EventBus methods;

 - examples of globalEventTypes: LESSONS_LIST_AVAILABLE, ADD_NEW_LESSON

 - change the collection of registered observers to be a map:

  ``{[key: string]: Observer[]} = {}``
  
  - add a private method to have a list of observersPerEventType

  - filter the collection of registered observers by event type

  - use a copy of testLessons array, instead of the entier testLessons:
  
  ``globalEventBus.notifyObservers(LESSONS_LIST_AVAILABLE, testLessons.slice(0));``
   
## 2.5. An Application Implemented in non-reactive style

``git checkout -b custom-events-non-scalable``

  - more than one component modifies the same data;

  -there are multiple components in the application that are keeping a copy of ``Lessons[]``

  - tight coupling between LessonsComponent and the main component

  - in the LessonsComponent we have a different array than the one from 
  
  EventBusExperimentsComponent,
  
  and that's why the operations implemented at the level of LessonsComponent won't propagate to the level of EventBusExperimentsComponent

 - define an inline Observer to add as second parameter to register an Observer of type ADD_NEW_LESSON EVENT:

 ```TypeScript
  globalEventBus.registerObserver(ADD_NEW_LESSON, {
      notify: lessonText => {
        this.lessons.push({
          id: Math.random(),
          description: lessonText
        });
      }
    });
```
- shared data and no clear owner

DO NOT USE SUCH IMPLEMENTATION, LIKE THE ONE FROM `custom-events-non-scalable` branch!!!
